So let's talk about some out of ordinary situations
when creating and implementing interfaces.
In the video on polymorphism and casting,
I showed upcasting and downcasting examples
with objects and class types.
In this video,
I wanna revisit a casting scenario
that is slightly different for interfaces than classes.
So in the Interfaces project,
we need to create a new class name called InterfaceCast.
All right, so there's the code.
So you can see firstly
there's an interface there, Laughable,
which has one abstract method called laugh.
There's a Joke class there
that implements the Laughable interface,
and it's got a concrete method called laugh.
Moving on further down,
there's a class there called Story
that doesn't implement any interface
or extend any class explicitly.
There's also another class there, FunnyStory,
that extends Story and implements Laughable,
and it overrides the Story's read method
and it implements the Laughable's laugh method.
And finally down the bottom there,
we've got a class InterfaceCast,
and that includes the main method,
where we're going to execute our code,
but also down here,
we've got two additional methods.
Firstly, the testLaughable method
that accepts a parameter of type Laughable
and executes the laugh method on the parsed object.
And then testStory,
that method that accepts a parameter of type Story
and executes the read method on the parsed object.
All right, in terms of what we're doing,
in the main method here,
you can see we're instantiating
three classes at the top there,
and then we're actually just calling the pass through method
on different types of objects for our testLaughable method,
passing joke and funnyStory,
and then the same for testStory,
we're passing the story and funnyStory instances.
So let's run that code.
And as you can see, that works fine.
No real surprises there so far.
Right, so I'm going to close that,
and at the bottom of our main method,
gonna paste in some code.
So what I'm trying to do there is cast the story variable
of type Story to Laughable
and then casting joke of type Joke to Story.
So the last line there is a compiler error,
and if we hover over it,
we can see inconvertible types,
can't cast Joke to Story.
So let's look at this for a moment.
The joke variable of type Joke is definitely not a Story.
If you go back and have a look at our Joke class,
Joke doesn't extend Story
and it's got no relationship to Story.
So this line, there's already been a compiler error,
shouldn't surprise you.
So I'm going to comment that out.
And now we haven't got a compiler error.
But let's now look at the line directly above it.
So the variable story here is a Story,
and if you come back to the Story class again,
you can see Story doesn't extend any classes
or implement any interfaces.
So that's a bit weird.
So why doesn't this line result in a compiler error?
Well, the explanation is that the compiler
does not apply the same rules to interface casting
as it does to class casting
because it may be that Story or a subclass of Story
will implement the interface
and applying this check will prevent this code
from being extensible.
So if we actually run this now,
and you can see we've actually got an exception here.
In fact, a ClassCastException,
class Story cannot be cast to class Laughable.
So now then, whilst the compiler allowed the cast,
but the Java virtual machine knows at runtime
that the object is definitely not a Laughable object.
All right, so let's, continuing on here,
what I'm going to do now is I'm gonna create
a new type of story called a Farce
which implements Laughable this time.
So I've got some code
and I'm going to paste it just above the main method
before our main class definition,
paste it in there.
Class Farce, which extends the Story class
and implements the Laughable interface.
And you can see there we've got
the laugh method overriden there.
Now that we've done that,
we need to make another change
so that we're using this new class,
and what we're gonna do is change line 51,
Story story equals new,
but this time we're gonna change that to Farce.
So I'm gonna comment that line out.
So I'll take a copy of it first.
Okay.
All right, so now if we run this,
we find this time that it actually works,
and our output's changed,
but more importantly,
we've no longer got a ClassCastException,
and the reason for that this time,
again, looking back to Story,
didn't implement any interface or extend any class,
but the class Farce did extend the Story
and implemented the Laughable interface.
And obviously the code that crashed previously,
we were trying to cast this Laughable, which failed,
but now it's working,
because of course our Farce class does implement
the Laughable interface.
All right, so moving on.
In previous videos,
I've talked about implementing the abstract methods,
but I didn't really discuss overriding the default method.
So let's try an example of that now.
So we're gonna create a new class here in our project.
Gonna call this one TestDefaultMethods.
All right, so there's our code.
So as you can see there,
we've got a couple of interfaces,
and as we scroll down a little bit,
and as you see with these interfaces,
both have got a default method there, teachTheseLessons,
and the Teachable interface
has got an abstract method teach,
and the Trainable interface
has got an abstract method train.
Looking down at the TestDefaultMethods class,
it implements only one of these interfaces,
in this case, Teachable,
and implements the abstract method teach,
and I've also implemented
the train method here for later use,
as you'll see later in this video.
All right, and now going, scrolling down our main method,
you can see we've created a new instance,
and then we're calling both the teach and train methods.
So if I run this code now,
there are no surprises, no errors.
We've got both outputs from both methods.
But what happens now if we go back up
to our class definition
and try and implement both interfaces?
So implement Teachable comma Trainable.
And suddenly we've got a compile error here.
If we hover over it,
we can see that TestDefaultMethods inherits
unrelated defaults for teachTheseLessons
from types Teachable and Trainable.
So basically, both interfaces have a default method,
and we'll scroll up and have a look at that
to confirm that again.
So both have got this default method
with the same signature, no arguments,
and the name teachTheseLessons,
and a class that implements both interfaces
only has two choices to resolve the situation
in this scenario,
because clearly we've got a conflict.
All we can really do down this situation here
is remove one of the interfaces from the declaration
or override a method.
And what I'm going to do is override the method,
the default method.
Let's go ahead and do that.
And I'm going to place this just above the main method.
You can see I've overridden teachTheseLessons.
The error disappears.
If we run the code,
if I scroll down,
you can see that teachTheseLessons has been overridden now.
The output we're seeing on the top of the line there is
"Everyone should learn math and science."
And obviously initially when we ran this,
we were getting the output
"Everyone should learn art and music"
'cause that was the default method of teachTheseLessons
that was being executed.
All right, and just a note here that the same process
that I've been through here is true of any abstract methods
that have the same signature,
so keep that in mind.
All right, let's finish the video here.
In the next one,
we'll take this to the next level
with some more example code.
See you in the next video.